Old John of Gaunt,
time-honored Lancaster,
hast thou, according to thy oath and band,
brought hither Henry Hereford, thy bold son,
here to make good the boisterous late appeal,
which then our leisure would not let us hear,
against the duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray?
I have, my liege.
Tell me, moreover, hast thou sounded him
if he appeal the duke on ancient malice,
or worthily, as a good subject should,
on some known ground of treachery in him?
As near as I could sift him on that argument,
on some apparent danger seen in him aimed at Your Highness.
No inveterate malice.
Then call them to our presence.
Face to face and frowning brow to brow,
ourselves will hear the accuser and the accused freely speak.
High-stomached are they both and full of ire,
in rage deaf as the sea, hasty as fire.
Many years of happy days befall my gracious sovereign,
my most loving liege.
Each day still better other's happiness
until the heavens, envying earth's good hap,
add an immortal title to your crown.
We thank you both.
Yet one but flatters us, as well appeareth by the cause you come,
namely to appeal each other of high treason.
Cousin of Hereford, what dost thou object
against the duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray?
First, heaven be the record to my speech.
In the devotion of a subject's love,
tendering the precious safety of my prince
and free from other misbegotten hate,
come I appellant to this princely presence.
Now, Thomas Mowbray, do I turn to thee,
and mark my greeting well,
for what I speak my body shall make good upon this earth
or my divine soul answer it in heaven.
Thou art a traitor and a miscreant,
too good to be so and too bad to live,
since the more fair and crystal is the sky,
the uglier seem the clouds that in it fly.
Once more, the more to aggravate the note,
with a foul traitor's name stuff I thy throat
and wish, so please my sovereign, ere I move,
what my tongue speaks my right drawn sword may prove.
Let not my cold words here accuse my zeal.
'Tis not the trial of a woman's war.
The bitter clamor of two eager tongues
can arbitrate this cause betwixt us twain.
The blood is hot that must be cooled for this,
yet can I not of such tame patience boast
as to be hushed and naught at all to say.
First, the fair reverence of Your Highness curbs me
from giving reins and spurs to my free speech,
which else would post until it had returned
these terms of treason doubled down his throat.
Setting aside his high blood's royalty
and let him be no kinsman to my liege,
I do defy him, and I spit at him,
call him a slanderous coward and a villain,
which to maintain I would allow him odds and meet him
were I tied to run afoot even to the frozen ridges of the Alps
or any other ground inhabitable,
wherever Englishman durst set his foot.
Meantime let this defend my loyalty.
By all my hopes, most falsely doth he lie.
Pale, trembling coward,
there I throw my gage,
disclaiming here the kindred of the king,
and lay aside my high blood's royalty,
which fear, not reverence, makes thee to except.
If guilty dread have left thee so much strength
as to take up mine honor's pawn,
then stoop.
By that and all the rites of knighthood else
will I make good against thee,
arm to arm, what I have spoke,
or thou canst worse devise.
I take it up, and by that sword
I swear which gently laid my knighthood on my shoulder,
I'll answer thee in any fair degree
or chivalrous design of knightly trial.
And when I mount, alive may I not light
if I be traitor or unjustly fight.
What doth our cousin lay to Mowbray's charge?
It must be great that can inherit us so much
as of a thought of ill in him.
Look what I speak.
My life shall prove it true
that Mowbray hath received 8,000 nobles
in name of lendings for Your Highness' soldiers,
the which he hath detained for lewd employments
like a false traitor and injurious villain.
Besides I say and will in battle prove or here or elsewhere
to the furthest verge that ever was surveyed by English eye,
that all the treasons for these 18 years
complotted and contrived in this land
fetch from false Mowbray their first head and spring.
Further I say and further will maintain
upon his bad life to make all this good,
that he did plot the duke of Gloucester's death,
suggest his soon-believing adversaries,
and consequently, like a traitor coward,
sluiced out his innocent soul with streams of blood,
which blood, like sacrificing Abel's,
cries even from the tongueless caverns of the earth
to me for justice and rough chastisement.
And, by the glorious worth of my descent,
this arm shall do it or this life be spent.
How high a pitch his resolution soars.
Thomas of Norfolk, what say'st thou to this?
Oh, let my sovereign turn away his face
and let his ears a little while be deaf
till I have told this slander of his blood
how God and good men hate so foul a liar.
Mowbray, impartial are our eyes and ears
were he my brother-- nay, my kingdom's heir.
As he is but my father's brother's son,
now, by my scepter's awe, I make a vow.
Such neighbor nearness to our sacred blood
should nothing privilege him
nor partialize the unstooping firmness of my upright soul.
He is our subject, Mowbray.
So art thou.
Free speech and fearless I to thee allow.
Then, Bolingbroke, as low as to thy heart,
through the false passage of thy throat, thou liest.
Three parts of that receipt I had for Calais
disbursed I duly to His Highness' soldiers.
The other part reserved I by consent,
for that my sovereign liege
was in my debt upon remainder of a dear account,
since last I went to France to fetch his queen.
Now swallow down that lie.
For Gloucester's death, I slew him not,
but to my own disgrace neglected my sworn duty in that case.
For you, my noble lord of Lancaster,
the honorable father to my foe,
once did I lay an ambush for your life,
a trespass that doth vex my grieved soul.
But ere I last received the sacrament, I did confess it
and exactly begged Your Grace's pardon,
and I hope I had it.
This is my fault.
As for the rest appealed,
it issues from the rancor of a villain,
a recreant and most degenerate traitor,
which in myself I boldly will defend
and interchangeably hurl down my gage
upon this overweening traitor's foot
to prove myself a loyal gentleman
even in the best blood chambered in his bosom.
In haste whereof,
most heartily I pray Your Highness
to assign our trial day.
Wrath-kindled gentlemen, be ruled by me.
Let's purge this choler without letting blood.
This we prescribe, though no physician.
Deep malice makes too deep incision.
Forget, forgive, conclude, and be agreed.
Our doctors say this is no month to bleed.
Good Uncle, let this end where it begun.
We'll calm the duke of Norfolk, you your son.
To be a make-peace shall become my age.
Throw down, my son, the duke of Norfolk's gage.
And, Norfolk, throw down his.
When, Harry, when?
Obedience bids I should not bid again.
Norfolk, throw down, we bid.
There is no boot.
Myself I throw, dread sovereign, at thy foot.
My life thou shalt command, but not my shame.
The one my duty owes,
but my fair name,
despite of death that lives upon my grave,
to dark dishonor's use thou shalt not have.
I am disgraced, impeached, and baffled here,
pierced to the soul with slander's venomed spear,
the which no balm can cure
but his heart blood which breathed this poison.
Rage must be withstood.
Give me his gage.
Lions make leopards tame.
Yea, but not change his spots.
Take but my shame and I resign my gage.
My dear, dear lord,
the purest treasure mortal times afford is spotless reputation.
That away, men are but gilded loam or painted clay.
A jewel in a ten-times barred up chest
is a bold spirit in a loyal breast.
Mine honor is my life.
Both grow in one.
Take honor from me, and my life is done.
Then, dear my liege, mine honor let me try.
In that I live, and for that will I die.
Cousin, throw up your gage.
Do you begin.
Oh, God, defend my soul from such deep sin.
Shall I seem crestfallen in my father's sight?
Or with pale beggar fear impeach my height
before this outdared dastard?
Ere my tongue shall wound my honor with such feeble wrong
or sound so base a parle,
my teeth shall tear the slavish motive of recanting fear
and spit it bleeding in his high disgrace,
where shame doth harbor, even in Mowbray's face.
We were not born to sue but to command.
Since which we cannot do to make you friends,
be ready, as your lives shall answer it,
at Coventry upon Saint Lambert's day.
There shall your swords and lances arbitrate
the swelling difference of your settled hate.
Since we can not atone you,
we shall see justice design the victor's chivalry.
Lord marshal, command our officers at arms.
Be ready to direct these home alarms.
Alas, the part I had in Gloucester's blood
doth more solicit me than your exclaims
to stir against the butchers of his life.
But since correction lieth
in those hands which made the fault which we cannot correct,
put we our quarrel to the will of heaven,
who, when they see the hours ripe on earth,
will rain hot vengeance on offenders' heads.
Finds brotherhood in thee no sharper spur?
Hath love in thy old blood no living fire?
Edward's seven sons, whereof thyself art one,
were as seven vials of his sacred blood
or seven fair branches springing from one root.
Some of those seven are dried by nature's course,
some of those branches by the destinies cut.
But Thomas, my dear lord, my life, my Gloucester,
one vial full of Edward's sacred blood,
one flourishing branch of his most royal root,
is cracked,
and all the precious liquor spilt is hacked down
and his summer leaves all faded
by envy's hand and murder's bloody axe.
Ah, Gaunt,
his blood was thine.
That bed, that womb, that metal, that self-mold
that fashioned thee made him a man.
And though thou livest and breathest,
yet art thou slain in him.
Thou dost consent in some large measure to thy father's death
in that thou seest thy wretched brother die,
who was the model of thy father's life.
Call it not patience, Gaunt.
It is despair.
In suffering thus thy brother to be slaughtered,
thou showest the naked pathway to thy life,
teaching stern murder how to butcher thee.
That which in mean men we entitle patience
is pale cold cowardice in noble breasts.
What shall I say?
To safeguard thine own life,
the best way is to venge my Gloucester's death.
God's is the quarrel,
for God's substitute, his deputy anointed in His sight,
hath caused his death,
the which if wrongfully, let heaven revenge,
for I may never lift an angry arm against His minister.
Where then, alas, may I complain myself?
To God, the widow's champion and defense.
Why, then, I will.
Farewell, old Gaunt.
Thou goest to Coventry,
there to behold our cousin Hereford and fell Mowbray fight.
Oh, sit my husband's wrongs on Hereford's spear
that they may enter butcher Mowbray's breast.
Or, if misfortune miss the first career,
be Mowbray's sins so heavy in his bosom
that they may break his foaming courser's back
and throw the rider headlong in the lists,
a caitiff recreant to my cousin Hereford.
Farewell, old Gaunt.
Thy sometimes brother's wife
with her companion grief must end her life.
Sister, farewell.
I must to Coventry.
As much good stay with thee as go with me.
Yet one word more.
Grief boundeth where it falls
not with the empty hollowness but weight.
I take my leave before I have begun,
for sorrow ends not when it seemeth done.
Commend me to thy brother, Edmund York.
Lo, this is all.
Nay, yet depart not so.
Though this be all, do not so quickly go.
I shall remember more.
Bid him--
ah, what?
With all good speed at Plashy visit me.
Alack, and what shall good old York there see
but empty lodgings and unfurnished walls,
unpeopled offices, untrodden stones?
And what hear there for welcome but my groans?
Therefore commend me.
Let him not come there
to seek out sorrow that dwells everywhere.
Desolate, desolate, will I hence and die.
The last leave of thee takes my weeping eye.
My Lord Aumerle, is Harry Hereford armed?
Yea, at all points and longs to enter in.
The duke of Norfolk, sprightfully and bold,
stays but the summons of the appellant's trumpet.
Why, then, the champions are prepared
and stay for nothing but His Majesty's approach.
Marshal, demand of yonder champion
the cause of his arrival here in arms.
Ask him his name
and orderly proceed to swear him in the justice of his cause.
In God's name and the king's,
say who thou art
and why thou comest thus knightly clad in arms,
against what man thou comest,
and what thy quarrel.
Speak truly on thy knighthood and thy oath,
and so defend thee heaven and thy valor.
My name is Thomas Mowbray, duke of Norfolk,
who hither come engaged by my oath--
which God defend a knight should violate--
both to defend my loyalty and truth
to God, my king, and my succeeding issue
against the duke of Hereford that appeals me,
and, by the grace of God and this mine arm, to prove him,
in defending of myself,
a traitor to my God, my king, and me.
And as I truly fight, defend me heaven.
Marshal, demand of yonder knight in arms both who he is
and why he cometh hither thus plated in habiliments of war,
and formally, according to our law,
depose him in the justice of his cause.
What is thy name, and wherefore comest thou hither
before King Richard in his royal lists?
Against whom comest thou, and what's thy quarrel?
Speak like a true knight, so defend thee heaven.
Harry of Hereford, Lancaster, and Derby am I,
who ready here do stand in arms
to prove, by God's grace and my body's valor,
in lists on Thomas Mowbray, duke of Norfolk,
that he is a traitor, foul and dangerous,
to God of heaven, King Richard, and to me.
And as I fight, defend me heaven.
On pain of death,
no person be so bold or daring-hardy
as to touch the lists
except the marshal and such officers appointed
to direct these fair designs.
Lord marshal,
let me kiss my sovereign's hand
and bow my knee before His Majesty,
for Mowbray and myself
are like two men that vow a long and weary pilgrimage.
Then let us take a ceremonious leave
and loving farewell of our several friends.
The appellant in all duty greets Your Highness
and craves to kiss your hand and take his leave.
We will descend and fold him in our arms.
Cousin of Hereford, as thy cause is right,
so be thy fortune in this royal fight.
Farewell, my blood, which if today thou shed,
lament we may, but not revenge thee dead.
Oh, let no noble eye profane a tear for me
if I be gored with Mowbray's spear.
As confident as is the falcon's flight against a bird
do I with Mowbray fight.
My loving lord, I take my leave of you;
of you, my noble cousin, Lord Aumerle.
Not sick, although I have to do with death,
but lusty, young, and cheerly drawing breath.
Lo, as at English feasts,
so I regreet the daintiest last to make the end most sweet.
Oh, thou, the earthly author of my blood,
whose youthful spirit in me regenerate,
doth with a twofold vigor lift me up
to reach at victory above my head.
Add proof unto mine armor with thy prayers,
and with thy blessings steel my lance's point
that it may enter Mowbray's waxen coat
and furbish new the name of John a Gaunt,
even in the lusty havior of his son.
God in thy good cause make thee prosperous.
Be swift like lightning in the execution
and let thy blows, doubly redoubled,
fall like amazing thunder
on the casque of thy adverse pernicious enemy.
Rouse up thy youthful blood.
Be valiant, and live.
Mine innocency and Saint George to thrive.
However God or fortune cast my lot, there lives or dies,
true to King Richard's throne,
a loyal, just, and upright gentleman.
Never did captive with a freer heart
cast off his chains of bondage
and embrace his golden uncontrolled enfranchisement
more than my dancing soul doth celebrate
this feast of battle with mine adversary.
Most mighty liege and my companion peers,
take from my mouth the wish of happy years.
As gentle and as jocund as to jest go I to fight.
Truth hath a quiet breast.
Farewell, my lord.
Securely I espy virtue with valor couched in thine eye.
Order the trial, marshal, and begin.
Harry of Hereford, Lancaster, and Derby,
receive thy lance and God defend the right.
Strong as a tower in hope, I cry amen.
Go bear this lance to Thomas, duke of Norfolk.
Herald Harry of Hereford, Lancaster, and Derby
stands here for God, his sovereign, and himself,
on pain to be found false and recreant,
to prove the duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray
a traitor to his God, his king, and him,
and dares him to set forward to the fight.
Here standeth Thomas Mowbray, duke of Norfolk,
on pain to be found false and recreant,
both to defend himself
and to approve Henry of Hereford, Lancaster, and Derby
to God, his sovereign, and to him disloyal,
courageously and with a free desire,
attending but the signal to begin.
Sound trumpets and set forward, combatants.
Stay!
The king hath thrown his warder down.
Let them lay by their helmets and their spears
and both return back to their chairs again.
Withdraw with us.
And let the trumpets sound
while we return these dukes what we decree.
Draw near
and list what with our council we have done.
For that our kingdom's earth should not be soiled
with that dear blood which it hath fostered,
and for our eyes do hate the dire aspect
of civil wounds ploughed up with neighbors' sword,
and for we think the eagle winged pride
of sky aspiring and ambitious thoughts,
with rival hating envy, set on you to wake our peace--
which in our country's cradle
draws the sweet infant breath of gentle sleep--
which so roused up with boisterous, untuned drums,
with harsh resounding trumpets' dreadful bray
and grating shock of wrathful iron arms,
might from our quiet confines fright fair peace
and make us wade even in our kindred's blood.
Therefore, we banish you our territories.
You, cousin Hereford, upon pain of life,
till twice five summers have enriched our fields
shall not regreet our fair dominions
but tread the stranger paths of banishment.
Thy will be done.
This must my comfort be:
that sun that warms you here shall shine on me,
and those his golden beams to you here lent
shall point on me and gild my banishment.
Norfolk, for thee remains a heavier doom,
which I with some unwillingness pronounce.
The sly, slow hours shall not determinate
the dateless limit of thy dear exile.
The hopeless word of "never to return"
breathe I against thee, upon pain of life.
A heavy sentence, my most sovereign liege,
and all unlooked for from Your Highness' mouth.
A dearer merit,
not so deep a maim as to be cast forth in the common air,
have I deserved at Your Highness' hands.
The language I have learned these 40 years,
my native English, now I must forego.
And now my tongue's use
is to me no more than an unstringed viol or a harp
or like a cunning instrument cased up or, being open,
put into his hands that knows no touch to tune the harmony.
Within my mouth you have enjailed my tongue,
doubly portcullised with my teeth and lips,
and dull, unfeeling, barren ignorance
is made my jailer to attend on me.
I am too old to fawn upon a nurse,
too far in years to be a pupil now.
What is thy sentence then but speechless death,
which robs my tongue from breathing native breath?
It boots thee not to be compassionate.
After our sentence, plaining comes too late.
Then thus I turn me from my country's light
to dwell in solemn shades of endless night.
Return again,
and take an oath with thee.
Lay on our royal sword your banished hands.
Swear by the duty that you owe to God--
our part therein we banish with yourselves--
to keep the oath that we administer.
You never shall, so help you truth and God,
embrace each other's love in banishment;
nor never look upon each other's face;
nor never write, regreet, nor reconcile
this louring tempest of your homebred hate;
nor never by advised purpose meet
to plot, contrive, or complot any ill
against us, our state, our subjects, or our land.
I swear.
And I, to keep all this.
Norfolk, so far as to mine enemy,
by this time, had the king permitted us,
one of our souls had wandered in the air,
banished this frail sepulcher of our flesh,
as now our flesh is banished from this land.
Confess thy treasons ere thou fly the realm.
Since thou hast far to go,
bear not along the clogging burthen of a guilty soul.
No, Bolingbroke.
If ever I were traitor,
my name be blotted from the book of life,
and I from heaven banished as from hence.
But what thou art, God, thou, and I do know.
And all too soon, I fear, the king shall rue.
Farewell, my liege.
Now no way can I stray.
Save back to England, all the world's my way.
Uncle, even in the glasses of thine eyes
I see thy grieved heart.
Thy sad aspect hath from the number of his banished years
plucked four away.
Six frozen winter spent,
return with welcome home from banishment.
How long a time lies in one little word.
Four lagging winters and four wanton springs end in a word.
Such is the breath of kings.
I thank my liege that, in regard of me,
he shortens four years of my son's exile.
But little vantage will I gain thereby,
for, ere the six years that he has to spend
shall change their moons and bring their times about,
my oil dried lamp and time bewasted light
shall be extinct with age and endless nights.
My inch of taper will be burnt and done,
and blindfold death not let me see my son.
Why, Uncle, thou hast many years to live.
But not a minute, King, that thou canst give.
Shorten my days thou canst with sullen sorrow
and pluck nights from me,
but not lend a morrow.
Thou canst help time to furrow me with age,
but stop no wrinkle of his pilgrimage.
Thy word is current with him for my deaths.
But dead, thy kingdom cannot buy my breath.
Thy son is banished upon good advice,
whereto thy tongue a party verdict gave.
Why at our justice seem'st thou then to lour?
Things sweet to taste prove in digestion sour.
You urged me as a judge,
but I had rather that you had bid me argue like a father.
Oh, had it been a stranger, not my child,
to smooth his fault I would have been more mild.
Alas, I looked when some of you should say,
I was too strict to make mine own away.
But you gave leave to my unwilling tongue
against my will to do myself this wrong.
Cousin, farewell.
And, Uncle, bid him so.
Six years we banish him, and he shall go.
Cousin, farewell.
What presence must not know,
from where you do remain let paper show.
My lord, no leave take I,
for I will ride, as far as land will let me, by your side.
Oh, to what purpose dost thou hoard thy words
that thou return'st no greeting to thy friends?
I have too few to take my leave of you,
when the tongue's office should be prodigal
to breathe the abundant dolor of the heart.
Thy grief is but thy absence for a time.
Joy absent.
Grief is present for that time.
What are six winters?
They are quickly gone.
To men in joy.
But grief makes one hour ten.
Call it a travel that thou takest for pleasure.
My heart will sigh when I miscall it so,
which finds it an enforced pilgrimage.
The sullen passage of thy weary steps esteem as foil
wherein thou art to set
the precious jewel of thy home return.
Nay.
Rather, every tedious stride I make will but remember me
what a deal of world I wander from the jewels that I love.
Must I not serve
a long apprenticehood to foreign passages,
and in the end, having my freedom,
boast of nothing else but that I was a journeyman to grief?
All places that the eye of heaven visits
are to a wise man ports and happy havens.
Teach thy necessity to reason thus.
There is no virtue like necessity.
Think not the king did banish thee, but thou the king.
Woe doth the heavier sit
when it perceives it is but faintly borne.
Go, say I sent thee forth to purchase honor
and not that the king exiled thee.
Or suppose devouring pestilence hangs in our air,
and thou art flying to a fresher clime.
Look what thy soul holds dear.
Imagine it to lie that way thou go'st, not whence thou comest.
Suppose the singing birds musicians,
the grass whereon thou tread'st the presence strewn,
the flowers fair ladies,
and thy steps no more than a delightful measure or a dance.
For gnarling sorrow hath less power
to bite the man that mocks at it and sets it light.
Oh, who can hold a fire in his hand
by thinking on the frosty Caucasus?
Or cloy the hungry edge of appetite
by bare imagination of a feast?
Or wallow naked in December snow
by thinking on fantastic summer's heat?
Oh, no.
The apprehension of the good
gives but the greater feeling to the worse.
Fell sorrow's tooth doth never rankle more
than when he bites but lanceth not the sore.
Come, come, my son.
I'll bring thee on thy way.
Had I thy youth and cause, I would not stay.
Then, England's ground, farewell.
Sweet soil, adieu,
my mother and my nurse that bears me yet.
Where'er I wander, boast of this I can:
though banished, yet a trueborn Englishman.
We did observe.
Cousin Aumerle, how far brought you high Hereford on his way?
I brought high Hereford, if you call him so,
but to the next highway,
and there I left him.
And say, what store of parting tears were shed?
Faith, none for me,
except the northeast wind,
which then blew bitterly against our faces,
awaked the sleeping rheum,
and so by chance did grace our hollow parting with a tear.
What said our cousin when you parted from him?
"Farewell."
And, for my heart disdained
that my tongue should so profane the word,
that taught me craft
to counterfeit oppression of such grief
that words seemed buried in my sorrow's grave.
Marry, would the word "farewell"
have lengthened hours and added years to his short banishment,
he should have had a volume of farewells.
But since it would not, he had none of me.
He is our cousin, cousin.
But 'tis doubt, when time shall call him home from banishment,
whether our kinsman come to see his friends.
Ourself and Bushy, Bagot here and Green
observed his courtship to the common people,
how he did seem to dive into their hearts
with humble and familiar courtesy.
What reverence he did throw away on slaves,
wooing poor craftsmen with the craft of smiles
and patient underbearing of his fortune,
as 'twere to banish their affects with him.
Off goes his bonnet to an oyster wench.
A brace of draymen bid God speed him well
and had the tribute of his supple knee,
with "Thanks, my countrymen, my loving friends,"
as were our England in reversion his,
and he our subjects' next degree in hope.
Well, he's gone, and with him go these thoughts.
Now, for the rebels which stand out in Ireland,
expedient manage must be made, my liege,
ere further leisure yield them further means
for their advantage and Your Highness' loss.
We will ourself in person to this war.
And, for our coffers,
with too great a court and liberal largess,
are grown somewhat light.
We are enforced to farm our royal realm.
The revenue whereof shall furnish us
for our affairs in hand.
If that come short,
our substitutes at home shall have blank charters.
Whereto, when they shall know what men are rich,
they shall subscribe them for large sums of gold
and send them after to supply our wants,
for we will make for Ireland presently.
Bushy, what news?
Old John of Gaunt is grievous sick, my lord, suddenly taken,
and hath sent post haste
to entreat Your Majesty to visit him.
Where lies he?
At Ely House.
Now put it, God, in the physician's mind
to help him to his grave immediately.
The lining of his coffers shall make coats
to deck our soldiers for these Irish wars.
Come, gentlemen, let's all go visit him.
Pray God, we may make haste
and come too late.
Amen.
Will the king come
that I may breathe my last in wholesome counsel
to his unstaid youth?
Vex not yourself
nor strive not with your breath,
for all in vain comes counsel to his ear.
Oh, but they say the tongues of dying men
enforce attention like deep harmony.
When words are scarce, they are seldom spent in vain,
for they breathe truth that breathe their words in pain.
He that no more must say is listened more
than they whom youth and ease have taught to glose.
More are men's ends marked than their lives before.
The setting sun and music at the close,
as the last taste of sweets, is sweetest last,
writ in remembrance more than things long past.
Though Richard my life's counsel would not hear,
my death's sad tale may yet undeaf his ear.
No, for it is stopped with other flattering sounds,
as praises of whose taste the wise are fond;
lascivious meters, to whose venom sound
the open ear of youth doth always listen.
Reports of fashions in proud Italy,
whose manners still our tardy, apish nation limps after
in base imitation.
Where doth the world thrust forth a vanity--
so it be new, there's no respect how vile--
that is not quickly buzzed into his ears?
Then all too late comes counsel to be heard,
where will doth mutiny with wit's regard.
Direct not him whose way himself will choose.
'Tis breath thou lack'st, and that breath wilt thou lose.
Methinks I am a prophet new inspired
and thus expiring do foretell of him.
His rash fierce blaze of riot cannot last,
for violent fires soon burn out themselves.
Small showers last long, but sudden storms are short.
He tires betimes that spurs too fast betimes.
With eager feeding food doth choke the feeder.
Light vanity, insatiate cormorant, consuming means
soon preys upon itself.
This royal throne of kings;
this sceptered isle;
this earth of majesty;
this seat of Mars;
this other Eden; demi-paradise;
this fortress built by nature for herself
against infection and the hand of war;
this happy breed of men;
this little world;
this precious stone set in the silver sea,
which serves it in the office of a wall
or as a moat defensive to one house
against the envy of less happier lands;
this blessed plot; this earth;
this realm; this England;
this nurse;
this teeming womb of royal kings,
feared by their breed and famous by their birth,
renowned for their deeds as far from home
for Christian service and true chivalry
as is the sepulcher in stubborn Jewry
of the world's ransom;
blessed Mary's Son;
this land of such dear souls;
this dear, dear land--
dear for her reputation through the world--
is now leased out--
I die pronouncing it--
like to a tenement or pelting farm.
England, bound in with the triumphant sea
whose rocky shore beats back the envious siege of watery Neptune,
is now bound in with shame,
with inky blots and rotten parchment bonds.
That England that was wont to conquer others
hath made a shameful conquest of itself.
Ah, would the scandal vanish with my life,
how happy then were my ensuing death.
The king is come.
Deal mildly with his youth,
for young, hot colts being raged do rage the more.
How fares our noble Uncle Lancaster?
What comfort, man?
How is't with aged Gaunt?
Oh, how that name befits my composition.
Old Gaunt indeed, and gaunt in being old.
Within me grief has kept a tedious fast.
And who abstains from meat that is not gaunt?
For sleeping England long time have I watched.
Watching breeds leanness.
Leanness is all gaunt.
The pleasure that some fathers feed upon is my strict fast.
I mean my children's looks.
And therein fasting hast thou made me gaunt.
Gaunt am I for the grave, gaunt as a grave,
whose hollow womb inherits naught but bones.
Can sick men play so nicely with their names?
No, misery makes sport to mock itself.
Since thou dost seek to kill my name in me,
I mock my name, great King, to flatter thee.
Should dying men flatter with those that live?
No, men living flatter those that die.
Thou, now a-dying, say'st thou flatterest me.
Oh, no, thou diest, though I the sicker be.
I am in health.
I breathe and see thee ill.
Now He that made me knows I see thee ill,
ill in myself to see and in thee seeing ill.
Thy deathbed is no lesser than thy land
wherein thou liest in reputation sick.
And thou, too careless patient as thou art,
commit'st thy anointed body
to the cure of those physicians that first wounded thee.
A thousand flatterers sit within thy crown,
whose compass is no bigger than thy head.
And yet, encaged in so small a verge,
the waste is no whit lesser than thy land.
Oh, had thy grandsire with a prophet's eye
seen how his son's son should destroy his sons,
from forth thy reach he would have laid thy shame,
deposing thee before thou wert possessed,
which art possessed now to depose thyself.
Why, cousin, wert thou regent of the world,
it were a shame to let this land by lease.
And for thy world enjoying but this land,
is it not more than shame to shame it so?
Landlord of England art thou now,
not king.
Thy state of law is bondslave to the law.
And thou--
A lunatic, lean-witted fool,
presuming on an ague's privilege,
darest with thy frozen admonition make pale our cheek,
chasing the royal blood with fury
from his native residence.
Now, by my seat's right royal majesty,
wert thou not brother to great Edward's son,
this tongue that runs so roundly in thy head
should run thy head from thy unreverent shoulders.
Oh, spare me not, my brother Edward's son.
For that I was his father Edward's son.
That blood already, like the pelican,
hast thou tapped out and drunkenly caroused.
My brother Gloucester, plain well-meaning soul,
whom fair befall in heaven amongst happy souls,
may be a precedent and witness good
that thou respect'st not spilling Edward's blood.
Joined with the present sickness that I have,
and thy unkindness be like crooked age
to crop at once a too long withered flower.
Live in thy shame,
but die not shame with thee.
These words hereafter thy tormentors be.
Convey me to my bed, then to my grave.
Love they to live that love and honor have.
And let them die that age and sullens have,
for both hast thou, and both become the grave.
I do beseech Your Majesty.
Impute his words to wayward sickliness and age in him.
He loves you, on my life,
and holds you dear as Harry, duke of Hereford,
were he here.
Right, you say true.
As Hereford's love, so his.
As theirs, so mine.
And all be as it is.
My liege, old Gaunt commends him to Your Majesty.
What says he?
Nay, nothing.
All is said.
His tongue is now a stringless instrument.
Words, life, and all, old Lancaster hath spent.
Be York the next that must be bankrupt so.
Though death be poor, it ends a mortal woe.
The ripest fruit first falls,
and so doth he.
His time is spent.
Our pilgrimage must be.
So much for that.
Now for our Irish wars.
We must supplant those rough, rugheaded kerns,
which live like venom
where no venom else but only they have privilege to live.
And for these great affairs do ask some charge.
Towards our assistance we do seize to us
the plate, coin, revenues, and moveables
whereof our Uncle Gaunt did stand possessed.
How long must I be patient?
Ah, how long shall tender duty make me suffer wrong?
Not Gloucester's death,
nor Hereford's banishment, not Gaunt's rebukes,
nor England's private wrongs,
nor the prevention of poor Bolingbroke about his marriage,
nor my own disgrace,
have ever made me sour my patient cheek
or bend one wrinkle on my sovereign's face.
I am the last of noble Edward's sons,
of whom thy father, prince of Wales, was first.
In war was never lion raged more fierce,
in peace was never gentle lamb more mild,
than was that young and princely gentleman.
His face thou hast,
for even so looked he,
accomplished with the number of thy hours.
But when he frowned,
it was against the French and not against his friends.
His noble hand did win what he did spend
and spent not that
which his triumphant father's hand had won.
His hands were guilty of no kindred blood,
but bloody with the enemies of his kin.
Oh, Richard.
York is too far gone with grief,
or else he never would compare between.
Why, Uncle, what's the matter?
Oh, my liege.
Pardon me, if you please.
If not, I, pleased not to be pardoned,
am content withal.
Seek you to seize and gripe into your hands
the royalties and rights of banished Hereford?
Is not Gaunt dead,
and doth not Hereford live?
Was not Gaunt just, and is not Harry true?
Did not the one deserve to have an heir?
Is not his heir a well-deserving son?
Take Hereford's rights away
and take from time his charters and his customary rights,
let not tomorrow then ensue today,
be not thyself.
For how art thou a king but by fair sequence and succession?
Now, afore God-- God forbid I say true--
if you do wrongfully seize Hereford's rights,
call in the letters patent that he hath
by his attorneys general to sue his livery,
and deny his offered homage,
you pluck a thousand dangers on your head.
You lose a thousand well-disposed hearts
and prick my tender patience
to such thoughts as honor and allegiance cannot think.
Think what you will.
We seize into our hands
his plate, his goods, his money, and his lands.
I'll not be by the while.
My liege, farewell.
What will ensue hereof, there's none can tell.
But by bad courses may be understood
that their events can never fall out good.
Go, Bushy, to the earl of Wiltshire straight.
Bid him repair to us to Ely House to see this business.
Tomorrow next we will for Ireland,
and 'tis time, I trow.
And we create, in absence of ourself,
our Uncle York lord governor of England,
for he is just and always loved us well.
Come on, our queen.
Tomorrow must we part.
Be merry,
for our time of stay is short.
Well, lords, the duke of Lancaster is dead.
And living, too, for now his son is duke.
Barely in title, not in revenues.
Richly in both, if justice had her right.
My heart is great, but it must break with silence,
ere't be disburdened with a liberal tongue.
Nay, speak thy mind,
and let him ne'er speak more
that speaks thy words again to do thee harm.
Tends that thou wouldst speak to the duke of Hereford?
If it be so, out with it boldly, man.
Quick is mine ear to hear of good towards him.
No good at all that I can do for him,
unless you call it good to pity him,
bereft and gelded of his patrimony.
Now, afore God,
'tis shame such wrongs are borne in him,
a royal prince,
and many moe of noble blood in this declining land.
The king is not himself, but basely led by flatterers.
And what they will inform,
merely in hate against any of us all,
that will the king severely prosecute 'gainst us,
our lives, our children, and our heirs.
The commons hath he pilled with grievous taxes
and quite lost their hearts.
The nobles hath he fined for ancient quarrels
And daily new exactions are devised
as blanks, benevolences, and I wot not what.
But what, o' God's name, doth become of this?
Wars have not wasted it, for warred he hath not,
but basely yielded upon compromise
that which his noble ancestors achieved with blows.
More hath he spent in peace than they in wars.
The earl of Wiltshire hath the realm in farm.
The king's grown bankrupt, like a broken man.
Reproach and dissolution hangeth over him.
He hath not money for these Irish wars,
his burdenous taxations notwithstanding,
but by the robbing of the banished duke--
His noble kinsman.
Oh, most degenerate king.
But, lords, we hear this fearful tempest sing,
yet seek no shelter to avoid the storm.
We see the wind sit sore upon our sails,
and yet we strike not, but securely perish.
We see the very wreck that we must suffer,
and unavoided is the danger now
for suffering so the causes of our wreck.
Not so.
Even through the hollow eyes of death I spy life peering,
but I dare not say how near the tidings of our comfort is.
Nay, let us share thy thoughts,
as thou dost ours.
Be confident to speak, Northumberland.
We three are but thyself.
And, speaking so,
thy words are but as thoughts.
Therefore, be bold.
Then thus.
I have from Le Port Blanc, a bay in Brittany,
received intelligence that Harry, duke of Hereford;
Rainold Lord Cobham,
that late broke from the duke of Exeter;
his brother, archbishop late of Canterbury;
Sir Thomas Erpingham; Sir John Ramston;
Sir John Norbery; Sir Robert Waterton; and Francis Quoint--
all these well furnished by the duke of Britain
with eight tall ships,
3,000 men of war--
are making hither with all due expedience
and shortly mean to touch our northern shore.
Perhaps they had ere this,
but that they stay
the first departing of the king for Ireland.
If then we shall shake off our slavish yoke,
imp out our drooping country's broken wing,
redeem from broking pawn the blemished crown,
wipe off the dust that hides our scepter's gilt,
and make high majesty look like itself,
away with me in post to Ravenspurgh.
But if you faint, as fearing to do so,
stay and be secret, and myself will go.
To horse; to horse.
Urge doubts to them that fear.
Hold out my horse, and I will first be there.
I know not what to do.
I would to God, so my untruth had not provoked him to it,
the king had cut off my head with my brother's.
Uncle--
What, are there no posts dispatched for Ireland?
How shall we do for money for these wars?
Come, Sister--
Cousin, I would say--
pray, pardon me.
Go, fellow.
Get thee home.
Provide some carts and bring away the armor that is there.
Gentlemen, will you go muster men?
If I know how or which way to order these affairs
thus disorderly thrust into my hands,
never believe me.
Both are my kinsmen.
The one is my sovereign,
whom both my oath and duty bids defend.
The other again is my kinsman, whom the king hath wronged,
whom conscience and my kindred bids to right.
Well, somewhat we must do.
Come, cousin; I'll dispose of you.
Gentlemen, will you go muster up your men
and meet me presently at Berkeley?
The wind sits fair for news to go to Ireland,
but none returns.
For us to levy power proportionable to the enemy
is all unpossible.
Besides, our nearness to the king in love
is near the hate of those love not the king.
And that is the wavering commons,
for their love lies in their purses,
and whoso empties them by so much
fills their hearts with deadly hate.
Wherein the king stands generally condemned.
If judgment lie in them, then so do we,
because we ever have been near the king.
Well, I will for refuge straight to Bristol Castle.
The earl of Wiltshire is already there.
Thither will I with you,
for little office will the hateful commons perform for us,
except like curs to tear us all to pieces.
Will you go along with us?
No.
I will to Ireland to His Majesty.
Farewell.
If heart's presages be not vain,
we three here part that ne'er shall meet again.
That's as York thrives to beat back Bolingbroke.
Alas, poor duke.
The task he undertakes
is numbering sands and drinking oceans dry.
Where one on his side fights, thousands will fly.
Farewell at once, for once, for all, forever.
Well, we may meet again.
I fear me, never.
How far is it, my lord, to Berkeley now?
Believe me, noble lord,
I am a stranger here in Gloucestershire.
These high, wild hills and rough, uneven ways
draws out our miles and makes them wearisome.
And yet your fair discourse hath been as sugar,
making the hard way sweet and delectable.
But I bethink me what a weary way
from Ravenspurgh to Cotswold will be found
in Ross and Willoughby, wanting your company,
which, I protest, hath very much beguiled
the tediousness and process of my travel.
But theirs is sweetened by the hope to have
the present benefit which I possess.
And hope to joy
is little less in joy than hope enjoyed.
By this the weary lords shall make their way seem short,
as mine hath done by sight of what I have,
your noble company.
Of much less value is my company than your good words.
But who comes here?
It is my son, young Harry Percy,
sent from my brother, Worcester, whencesoever.
Harry.
How fares your uncle?
I had thought, my lord, to have learned his health of you.
Why, is he not with the queen?
No, my good lord.
He hath forsook the court, broken his staff of office,
and dispersed the household of the king.
What was his reason?
He was not so resolved when last we spake together.
Because your lordship was proclaimed traitor.
But he, my lord, is gone to Ravenspurgh
to offer service to the duke of Hereford,
and sent me over by Berkeley
to discover what power the duke of York had levied there,
then with directions to repair to Ravenspurgh.
Have you forgot the duke of Hereford, boy?
No, my good lord, for that is not forgot
which ne'er I did remember.
To my knowledge,
I never in my life did look on him.
Then learn to know him now.
This is the duke.
My gracious lord,
I tender you my service,
such as it is, being tender, raw, and young,
which elder days shall ripen and confirm
to more approved service and desert.
I thank thee, gentle Percy,
and be sure I count myself in nothing else so happy
as in a soul remembering my good friends.
And, as my fortune ripens with thy love,
it shall be still thy true love's recompense.
My heart this covenant makes.
My hand thus seals it.
How far is it to Berkeley,
and what stir keeps good old York there with his men of war?
There stands the castle by yon tuft of trees,
manned with 300 men, as I have heard.
And in it are the lords of York, Berkeley, and Seymour.
None else of name and noble estimate.
Here come the lords of Ross and Willoughby,
bloody with spurring and fiery red with haste.
Welcome, my lords.
I wot your love pursues a banished traitor.
All my treasury is yet but unfelt thanks,
which more enriched
shall be your love and labor's recompense.
Your presence makes us rich, most noble lord--
And far surmounts our labor to attain it.
Evermore thanks, the exchequer of the poor,
which, till my infant fortune comes to years,
stands for my bounty.
But who comes here?
It is my lord of Berkeley, as I guess.
My lord of Hereford, my message is to you.
My lord, my answer is to Lancaster,
and I am come to seek that name in England.
And I must find that title in your tongue
before I make reply to aught you say.
Mistake me not, my lord.
'Tis not my meaning to raze one title of your honor out.
To you, my lord, I come, what lord you will,
from the most gracious regent of this land,
the duke of York, to know what pricks you on
to take advantage of the absent time
and fright our native peace with self-born arms.
I shall not need transport my words by you.
Here comes His Grace in person.
My noble uncle.
Show me thy humble heart and not thy knee,
whose duty is deceivable and false.
My gracious uncle--
Tut, tut.
Grace me no grace, nor uncle me no uncle.
I am no traitor's uncle,
and that word "grace" in an ungracious mouth is but profane.
Why have those banished and forbidden legs
dared once to touch a dust of England's ground?
But then more "why."
Why have they dared to march
so many miles upon her peaceful bosom,
frighting her pale faced villages with war
and ostentation of despised arms?
Comest thou because the anointed king is hence?
Why, foolish boy, the king is left behind,
and in my loyal bosom lies his power.
Were I but now the lord of such hot youth
as when brave Gaunt, thy father, and myself
rescued the Black Prince, that young Mars of men,
from forth the ranks of many thousand French.
Oh, then how quickly would this arm of mine,
now prisoner to the palsy, chastise thee
and minister correction to thy fault.
My gracious uncle, let me know my fault.
On what condition stands it and wherein?
Even in condition of the worst degree,
in gross rebellion and detested treason.
Thou art a banished man
and here art come before the expiration of thy time
in braving arms against thy sovereign.
As I was banished, I was banished Hereford.
But as I come, I come for Lancaster.
And, noble Uncle, I beseech Your Grace.
Look on my wrongs with an indifferent eye.
You are my father,
for methinks in you I see old Gaunt alive.
Oh, then, my father, will you permit
that I shall stand condemned a wandering vagabond,
my rights and royalties plucked from my arms perforce
and given away to upstart unthrifts?
Wherefore was I born?
If that my cousin king be king in England,
it must be granted I am duke of Lancaster.
You have a son, Aumerle, my noble cousin.
Had you first died, and he been thus trod down,
he should have found his uncle Gaunt a father
to rouse his wrongs and chase them to the bay.
I am denied to sue my livery here,
and yet my letters patents give me leave.
My father's goods are all distrained and sold,
and these and all are all amiss employed.
What would you have me do?
I am a subject, and I challenge law.
Attorneys are denied me,
and therefore, personally I lay my claim
to my inheritance of free descent.
The noble duke hath been too much abused.
It stands Your Grace upon to do him right.
Base men by his endowments are made great.
My lords of England, let me tell you this.
I have had feeling of my cousin's wrongs
and labored all I could to do him right.
But in this kind to come, in braving arms,
be his own carver and cut out his way
to find out right with wrong, it may not be.
And you who do abet him in this kind
cherish rebellion and are rebels all.
The noble duke hath sworn his coming is but for his own.
And for the right of that,
we all have strongly sworn to give him aid
and let him never see joy that breaks that oath.
Well, well.
I see the issue of these arms.
I cannot mend it, I must needs confess,
because my power is weak and all ill left.
But if I could,
by Him that gave me life,
I would attach you all and make you stoop
unto the sovereign mercy of the king.
But since I cannot, be it known to you I do remain as neuter.
And so farewell...
unless you please to enter in the castle
and there repose you for this night.
An offer, Uncle, that we will accept.
But we must win Your Grace to go with us to Bristol Castle,
which they say is held by Bushy, Bagot, and their complices,
the caterpillars of the commonwealth,
which I have sworn to weed and pluck away.
It may be that I will go with you.
No, but yet I'll pause,
for I am loath to break our country's laws.
Nor friends nor foes, to me welcome you are.
Things past redress are now with me past care.
My lord of Salisbury, we have stayed ten days
and hardly kept our countrymen together,
and yet we hear no tidings from the king.
Therefore we will disperse ourselves.
Farewell.
Stay yet another day, thou trusty Welshman.
The king reposeth all his confidence in thee.
'Tis thought the king is dead.
We will not stay.
The bay trees in our country are all withered
and meteors fright the fixed stars of heaven.
The pale faced moon looks bloody on the earth,
and lean looked prophets whisper fearful change.
Rich men look sad and ruffians dance and leap,
the one in fear to lose what they enjoy,
the other to enjoy by rage and war.
These signs forerun the death or fall of kings.
Farewell.
Our countrymen have gone and fled,
as well assured Richard, their king, is dead.
Bushy and Green, I will not vex your souls--
since presently your souls must part your bodies--
with too much urging your pernicious lives,
for it were no charity.
Yet to wash your blood from off my hands,
here in the view of men
I will unfold some causes of your deaths.
You have misled a prince, a royal king,
a happy gentleman in blood and lineaments,
by you unhappied and disfigured clean.
You have in manner with your sinful hours
made a divorce betwixt his queen and him,
broke the possession of a royal bed,
and stained the beauty of a fair queen's cheeks
with tears drawn from her eyes by your foul wrongs.
Myself, a prince by fortune of my birth,
near to the king in blood--
and near in love till you did make him misinterpret me--
have stooped my neck under your injuries
and sighed my English breath in foreign clouds,
eating the bitter bread of banishment,
whilst you have fed upon my signories,
disparked my parks and felled my forest woods,
from my own windows torn my household coat,
razed out my imprese, leaving me no sign,
save men's opinions and my living blood,
to show the world I am a gentleman.
This and much more, much more than twice all this,
condemns you to the death.
See them delivered over to execution and the hand of death.
More welcome is the stroke of death to me
than Bolingbroke to England.
Lords, farewell.
My comfort is that heaven will take our souls
and plague injustice with the pains of hell.
My Lord Northumberland, see them dispatched.
Uncle,
you say the queen is at your house.
For God's sake, fairly let her be entreated.
Tell her I send to her my kind commends.
Take special care my greetings be delivered.
A gentleman of mine I have dispatched
with letters of your love to her at large.
Thanks, gentle Uncle.
Come, lords; away.
To fight with Glendower and his complices:
awhile to work, and after, holiday.
Barkloughly Castle call they this at hand?
Yea, my lord.
How brooks Your Grace the air
after your late tossing on the breaking seas?
Needs must I like it well.
I weep for joy to stand upon my kingdom once again.
Dear earth,
I do salute thee with my hands,
though rebels wound thee with their horses' hoofs.
As a long-parted mother with her child
plays fondly with her tears and smiles in meeting,
so weeping, smiling, greet I thee, my earth,
and do thee favors with my royal hands.
Feed not thy sovereign's foe, my gentle earth,
nor with thy sweets comfort his ravenous sense,
but let thy spiders that suck up thy venom
and heavy-gaited toads lie in their way,
doing annoyance to the treacherous feet
which with usurping steps do trample thee.
Yield stinging nettles to mine enemies.
And when they from thy bosom pluck a flower,
guard it, I pray thee, with a lurking adder
whose double-tongue may with a mortal touch
throw death upon thy sovereign's enemies.
Mock not my senseless conjuration, lords.
This earth shall have a feeling
and these stones prove armed soldiers
ere her native king shall falter under foul rebellion's arms.
Fear not, my lord.
That power that made you king
hath power to keep you king in spite of all.
The means that heaven yields must be embraced
and not neglected,
else, if heaven would, and we will not,
heaven's offer we refuse,
the proffered means of succor and redress.
He means, my lord, that we are too remiss
whilst Bolingbroke, through our security,
grows strong and great in substance and in power.
Discomfortable cousin.
Know'st thou not that when the searching eye of heaven
is hid behind the globe and lights the lower world,
then thieves and robbers range abroad unseen
in murders and in outrage, boldly here.
But when from under this terrestrial ball
he fires the proud tops of the eastern pines
and darts his light through every guilty hole,
then murders, treasons, and detested sins,
the cloak of night being plucked from off their backs,
stand bare and naked, trembling at themselves?
So when this thief, this traitor, Bolingbroke,
who all this while hath reveled in the night
whilst we were wandering with the antipodes,
shall see us rising in our throne, the east.
His treasons will sit blushing on his face,
not able to endure the sight of day,
but self-affrighted tremble at his sin.
Not all the water in the rough, rude sea
can wash the balm off from an anointed king.
The breath of worldly men cannot depose
the deputy elected by the Lord.
For every man that Bolingbroke hath pressed
to lift shrewd steel against our golden crown,
God for his Richard hath in heavenly pay a glorious angel.
Then, if angels fight,
weak men must fall,
for heaven still guards the right.
Welcome, my lord.
How far off lies your power?
Nor near nor farther off, my gracious lord,
than this weak arm.
Discomfort guides my tongue
and bids me speak of nothing but despair.
One day too late, I fear me, gracious Lord,
hath clouded all thy happy days on earth.
Oh, call back yesterday.
Bid time return,
and thou shalt have 12,000 fighting men.
Today, today-- unhappy day, too late--
o'erthrows thy joys, friends, fortune, and thy state.
For all the Welshmen, hearing thou wert dead,
are gone to Bolingbroke, dispersed and fled.
Comfort, my liege.
Why looks Your Grace so pale?
But now the blood of 20,000 men did triumph in my face,
and they are fled.
And till so much blood thither come again,
Have I not reason to look pale and dead?
All souls that will be safe fly from my side,
for time hath set a blot upon my pride.
Comfort, my liege.
Remember who you are.
I had forgot myself.
Am I not king?
Awake, thou coward majesty.
Thou sleepest.
Is not the king's name 20,000 names?
Arm, arm, my name.
A puny subject strikes at thy great glory.
Look not to the ground, ye favorites of a king.
Are we not high?
High be our thoughts.
I know my uncle York hath power enough to serve our turn.
But who comes here?
More health and happiness betide my liege
than can my care-tuned tongue deliver him.
Mine ear is open and my heart prepared.
The worst is worldly loss thou canst unfold.
Say, is my kingdom lost?
Why, 'twas my care.
And what loss is it to be rid of care?
Strives Bolingbroke to be as great as we?
Greater he shall not be.
If he serve God,
we'll serve Him, too, and be His fellow so.
Revolt our subjects?
That we cannot mend.
They break their faith to God as well as us.
Cry woe, destruction, ruin, and decay.
The worst is death, and death will have his day.
Glad am I that Your Highness
is so armed to bear the tidings of calamity.
Like an unseasonable stormy day
which makes the silver rivers drown their shores,
as if the world were all dissolved to tears,
so high above his limits swells the rage of Bolingbroke,
covering your fearful land
with hard, bright steel and hearts harder than steel.
Whitebeards have armed their thin and hairless scalps
against thy majesty.
Boys with women's voices strive to speak big
and clap their female joints
in stiff, unwieldy arms against thy crown.
Thy very beadsmen learn to bend their bows
of double-fatal yew against thy state.
Yea, distaff women manage rusty bills against thy seat.
Both young and old rebel,
and all goes worse than I have power to tell.
Too well, too well thou tell'st a tale so ill.
Where is the earl of Wiltshire?
Where is Bagot?
What is become of Bushy?
Where is Green,
that they have let the dangerous enemy
measure our confines with such peaceful steps?
If we prevail, their heads shall pay for it.
I warrant they have made peace with Bolingbroke.
Peace have they made with him indeed, my lord.
Oh, villains!
Vipers damned without redemption!
Dogs easily won to fawn on any man.
Snakes, in my heart blood warmed, that sting my heart.
Three Judases, each one thrice worse than Judas.
Would they make peace?
Terrible hell make war
upon their spotted souls for this offence.
Sweet love, I see changing his property
turns to the sourest and most deadly hate.
Again uncurse their souls.
Their peace is made with heads and not with hands.
Those whom you curse
have felt the worst of death's destroying wound
and lie full low, graved in the hollow ground.
Is Bushy, Green, and the earl of Wiltshire dead?
Aye, all of them at Bristol lost their heads.
Where is the duke, my father, with his power?
No matter where.
Of comfort no man speak.
Let's talk of graves, of worms, and epitaphs.
Make dust our paper,
and with rainy eyes write sorrow on the bosom of the earth.
Let's choose executors and talk of wills.
And yet not so,
for what can we bequeath,
save our deposed bodies to the ground?
Our lands, our lives, and all are Bolingbroke's,
and nothing can we call our own but death
and that small model of the barren earth
which serves as paste and cover to our bones.
For God's sake, let us sit upon the ground
and tell sad stories of the death of kings:
how some have been deposed,
some slain in war,
some haunted by the ghosts they have deposed,
some poisoned by their wives,
some sleeping killed.
All murdered.
For within the hollow crown
that rounds the mortal temples of a king
keeps death his court.
And there the antic sits,
scoffing his state and grinning at his pomp,
allowing him a breath,
a little scene to monarchize, be feared, and kill with looks,
infusing him with self and vain conceit,
as if this flesh which walls about our life
were brass impregnable,
and humored thus, comes at the last,
and with a little pin bores through his castle wall,
and farewell king.
Cover your heads
and mock not flesh and blood with solemn reverence.
Throw away respect, tradition, form, and ceremonious duty,
for you have but mistook me all this while.
I live with bread like you,
feel want,
taste grief,
need friends.
Subjected thus,
how can you say to me, I am a king?
My lord, wise men ne'er sit and wail their woes,
but presently prevent the ways to wail.
To fear the foe, since fear oppresseth strength,
gives in your weakness strength unto your foe,
and so your follies fight against yourself.
Fear and be slain.
No worse can come to fight.
And fight and die is death destroying death,
where fearing dying pays death servile breath.
My father hath a power.
Inquire of him and learn to make a body of a limb.
Thou chidest me well.
Proud Bolingbroke,
I come to change blows with thee for our day of doom.
This ague fit of fear is overblown.
An easy task it is to win our own.
Say, Scroop, where lies our uncle with his power?
Speak sweetly, man,
although thy looks be sour.
Men judge by the complexion of the sky
the state and inclination of the day,
and so may you by my dull and heavy eye.
My tongue hath but a heavier tale to say.
I play the torturer,
by small and small
to lengthen out the worst that must be spoken.
Your uncle York is joined with Bolingbroke--
and all your northern castles yielded up,
and all your southern gentlemen in arms upon his party.
Thou hast said enough.
Beshrew thee, cousin, which didst lead me forth
of that sweet way I was in to despair.
What say you now?
What comfort have we now?
By heaven, I'll hate him everlastingly
that bids me be of comfort anymore.
Go to Flint Castle.
There I'll pine away.
A king, woe's slave, shall kingly woe obey.
That power I have, discharge,
and let them go to ear the land that hath some hope to grow,
for I have none.
Let no man speak again to alter this,
for counsel is but vain.
My liege, one word--
He does me double wrong
that wounds me with the flatteries of his tongue.
Discharge my followers!
Let them hence away
from Richard's night to Bolingbroke's fair day.
intelligence
we learn the Welshmen are dispersed
and Salisbury is gone to meet the king,
who lately landed with some few private friends upon this coast.
The news is very fair and good, my lord.
Richard not far from hence hath hid his head.
It would beseem the lord Northumberland
to say "King Richard."
Alack the heavy day
when such a sacred king should hide his head.
Your Grace mistakes.
Only to be brief left I his title out.
The time hath been,
would you have been so brief with him,
he would have been so brief with you, to shorten you,
for taking so the head, your whole head's length.
Mistake not, Uncle, further than you should--
Take not, good cousin, further than you should,
lest you mistake the heavens are o'er our heads.
I know it, Uncle, and oppose not myself against their will.
But who comes here?
Welcome, Harry.
What, will not this castle yield?
The castle royally is manned, my lord, against thy entrance.
Royally?
Why, it contains no king?
Yes, my good lord, it doth contain a king.
King Richard lies within the limits of yon lime and stone,
and with him are the lord Aumerle,
Lord Salisbury, Sir Stephen Scroop,
besides a clergyman of holy reverence--
who, I cannot learn.
Oh, belike it is the bishop of Carlisle.
Noble lord, go to the rude ribs of that ancient castle.
Through brazen trumpet send the breath of parle
into his ruined ears, and thus deliver:
Henry Bolingbroke, on both his knees,
doth kiss King Richard's hand
and sends allegiance and true faith of heart
to his most royal person,
hither come even at his feet to lay my arms and power,
provided that my banishment repealed
and lands restored again be freely granted.
If not, I'll use the advantage of my power
and lay the summer's dust with showers of blood
rained from the wounds of slaughtered Englishmen.
The which, how far off from the mind of Bolingbroke it is,
such crimson tempest should bedrench
the fresh green lap of fair King Richard's land,
my stooping duty tenderly shall show.
Go.
Signify as much,
while here we march upon the grassy carpet of this plain.
Let's march without the noise of threatening drum,
that from this castle's tattered battlements
our fair appointments may be well perused.
Methinks King Richard and myself should meet
with no less terror
than the elements of fire and water,
when their thundering shock at meeting
tears the cloudy cheeks of heaven.
Be he the fire.
I'll be the yielding water.
The rage be his,
whilst on the earth I rain my waters--
on the earth, and not on him.
March on,
and mark King Richard how he looks.
See; see.
King Richard doth himself appear,
as doth the blushing, discontented sun
from out the fiery portal of the east,
when he perceives the envious clouds are bent
to dim his glory and to stain the track
of his bright passage to the occident.
Yet looks he like a king.
Behold his eye, as bright as is the eagle's,
lightens forth controlling majesty.
Alack, alack, for woe,
that any harm should stain so fair a show.
We are amazed
and thus long have we stood
to watch the fearful bending of thy knee,
because we thought ourself thy lawful king.
And if we be,
how dare thy joints forget
to pay their awful duty to our presence?
If we be not, show us the hand of God
that hath dismissed us from our stewardship,
for well we know, no hand of blood and bone
can gripe the sacred handle of our scepter
unless he do profane, steal, or usurp.
And though you think that all, as you have done,
have torn their souls by turning them from us,
and we are barren and bereft of friends,
yet know, my master, God omnipotent,
is mustering in his clouds, on our behalf,
armies of pestilence,
and they shall strike your children yet unborn and unbegot
that lift your vassal hands against my head
and threat the glory of my precious crown.
Tell Bolingbroke-- for yond methinks he stands--
that every stride he makes upon my land is dangerous treason.
He is come to open the purple testament of bleeding war.
But ere the crown he looks for live in peace,
10,000 bloody crowns of mothers' sons
shall ill become the flower of England's face,
change the complexion of her maid-pale peace
to scarlet indignation
and bedew her pastures' grass with faithful English blood.
The king of heaven forbid our lord the king
should so with civil and uncivil arms be rushed upon.
Thy thrice noble cousin, Harry Bolingbroke,
doth humbly kiss thy hand.
And by the honorable tomb he swears,
that stands upon your royal grandsire's bones,
and by the royalties of both your bloods,
currents that spring from one most gracious head,
and by the buried hand of warlike Gaunt,
and by the worth and honor of himself,
comprising all that may be sworn or said,
his coming hither hath no further scope
than for his lineal royalties
and to beg enfranchisement immediate on his knees,
which on thy royal party granted once,
his glittering arms he will commend to rust,
his barbed steeds to stables,
and his heart to faithful service of Your Majesty.
This swears he, as he is a prince, is just.
And, as I am a gentleman, I credit him.
Northumberland, say thus the king returns:
his noble cousin is right welcome hither
and all the number of his fair demands
shall be accomplished without contradiction.
With all the gracious utterance that thou hast,
speak to his gentle hearing kind commends.
We do debase ourselves, cousin, do we not,
to look so poorly and to speak so fair?
Shall we call back Northumberland
and send defiance to the traitor, and so die?
No, good my lord.
Let's fight with gentle words
till time lend friends and friends their helpful swords.
Oh, God.
Oh, God, that e'er this tongue of mine
that laid the sentence of dread banishment on yon proud man
should take it off again with words of sooth.
Oh, that I were as great as is my grief
or lesser than my name,
or that I could forget what I have been
or not remember what I must be now.
Swell'st thou, proud heart?
I'll give thee scope to beat,
since foes have scope to beat both thee and me.
Northumberland comes back from Bolingbroke.
What must the king do now?
Must he submit?
The king shall do it.
Must he be deposed?
The king shall be contented.
Must he lose the name of king?
O' God's name, let it go.
I'll give my jewels for a set of beads,
my gorgeous palace for a hermitage,
my gay apparel for an almsman's gown,
my figured goblets for a dish of wood,
my scepter for a palmer's walking staff,
my subjects for a pair of carved saints,
and my large kingdom for a little grave--
a little, little grave.
An obscure grave.
Or I'll be buried in the king's highway,
some way of common trade,
where subjects' feet
may hourly trample on their sovereign's head;
for on my heart they tread now whilst I live,
and buried once, why not upon my head?
Aumerle, thou weep'st.
My tenderhearted cousin,
we'll make foul weather with despised tears.
Our sighs and they shall lodge the summer corn
and make a dearth in this revolting land.
Or shall we play the wantons with our woes
and make some pretty match with shedding tears,
as thus to drop them still upon one place
till they have fretted us a pair of graves within the earth
and, therein laid--
there lies two kinsmen.
Dig their graves with weeping eyes.
Would not this ill do well?
Well,
well, I see I talk but idly, and you laugh at me.
Most mighty prince, my lord Northumberland,
what says King Bolingbroke?
Will His Majesty give Richard leave to live till Richard die?
You make a leg, and Bolingbroke says aye.
My lord, he doth attend in the base court to speak with you.
May it please you to come down.
Down.
Down I come,
like glistering Phaethon
wanting the manage of unruly jades.
In the base court?
Base court, where kings grow base,
to come at traitors' calls and do them grace.
In the base court?
Come down?
Down, court;
down, king;
for night owls shriek where mounting larks should sing.
What says His Majesty?
Sorrow and grief of heart make him speak fondly,
like a frantic man yet he is come.
Stand all apart and show fair duty to His Majesty.
My gracious lord.
Fair cousin, you debase your princely knee
to make the base earth proud with kissing it.
Me rather had my heart might feel your love
than my unpleased eye see your courtesy.
Up, cousin, up.
Your heart is up, I know, thus high at least,
although your knee be low.
My gracious lord, I come but for mine own.
Your own is yours, and I am yours, and all.
So far be mine, my most redoubted lord,
as my true service shall deserve your love.
Well you deserve.
They well deserve to have
that know the strongest and surest way to get.
Uncle, give me your hands.
Nay, dry your eyes.
Tears show their loves, but want their remedies.
Cousin, I am too young to be your father,
though you are old enough to be my heir.
What you will have, I'll give, and willing too,
for do we must what force will have us do.
Set on towards London, cousin, is it so?
Yea, my good lord.
Then I must not say no.
What sport shall we devise here in this garden,
to drive away the heavy thought of care?
Madam, we'll play at bowls.
'Twill make me think the world is full of rubs,
and that my fortune runs against the bias.
Madam, we'll dance.
My legs can keep no measure in delight
when my poor heart no measure keeps in grief.
Therefore, no dancing, girl.
Some other sport.
Madam, we'll tell tales.
Of sorrow or of joy?
Of either, madam.
Of neither, girl.
For if of joy, being altogether wanting,
it doth remember me the more of sorrow;
or if of grief, being altogether had,
it adds more sorrow to my want of joy.
For what I have I need not to repeat,
and what I want it boots not to complain.
Madam, I'll sing.
'Tis well that thou hast cause,
but thou shouldst please me better wouldst thou weep.
I could weep, madam, would it do you good.
And I could sing, would weeping do me good,
and never borrow any tear of thee.
Here come the gardeners.
Let's step into the shadow of these trees.
My wretchedness unto a row of pins
they'll talk of state,
for everyone doth so against a change.
Woe is forerun with woe.
Go, bind thou up yon dangling apricocks,
which, like unruly children,
make their sire stoop with oppression
of their prodigal weight.
Give some supportance to the bending twigs.
Go thou and, like an executioner,
cut off the heads of too fast growing sprays
that look too lofty in our commonwealth.
All must be even in our government.
You thus employed,
I will go root away the noisome weeds,
which without profit suck the soil's fertility
from the wholesome flowers.
Why should we, in the compass of a pale,
keep law and form and due proportion,
showing, as in a model, our firm estate,
when our sea-walled garden, the whole land,
is full of weeds,
her fairest flowers choked up,
her fruit trees all unpruned,
her hedges ruined, her knots disordered,
and her wholesome herbs swarming with caterpillars?
Hold thy peace.
He who that hath suffered this disordered spring
hath now himself met with the fall of leaf.
The weeds which his broad, spreading leaves did shelter,
that seemed in eating him to hold him up,
are plucked up root and all by Bolingbroke--
I mean the earl of Wiltshire, Bushy, Green.
What, are they dead?
They are, and Bolingbroke hath seized the wasteful king.
Oh, I am pressed to death through want of speaking.
Thou, old Adam's likeness,
set to dress this garden,
how dares thy harsh rude tongue sound this unpleasing news?
What Eve, what serpent, hath suggested thee
to make a second fall of cursed man?
Why dost thou say King Richard is deposed?
Darest thou,
thou little better thing than earth,
divine his downfall?
Say, where, when, and how camest thou by this ill tidings?
Speak, thou wretch.
Pardon me, madam.
Little joy have I to breathe this news.
Yet what I say is true.
King Richard, he is in the mighty hold of Bolingbroke.
Their fortunes both are weighed.
In your lord's scale is nothing but himself
and some few vanities that make him light.
But in the balance of great Bolingbroke,
besides himself, are all the English peers.
And with that odds he weighs King Richard down.
Post you to London, and you will find it so.
I speak no more than everyone doth know.
Nimble mischance, that art so light of foot,
does not thy embassage belong to me,
and am I the last that knows it?
Oh, thou think'st to serve me last
that I may longest keep thy sorrow in my breast.
Come, ladies, go,
to meet at London London's king in woe.
What, was I born to this,
that my sad look
should grace the triumph of great Bolingbroke?
Gardener, for telling me this news of woe,
pray God the plants thou graft'st may never grow.
Great duke of Lancaster,
I come to thee from plume plucked Richard,
who with willing soul adopts thee heir,
and his high scepter yields
to the possession of thy royal hand.
Ascend his throne, descending now from him,
and long live Henry, fourth of that name.
Long live Henry, fourth of that name.
In God's name, I'll ascend the regal throne.
Marry.
God forbid.
Worst in this royal presence may I speak,
yet best beseeming me to speak the truth.
Would God that any in this noble presence
were enough noble to be upright judge of noble Richard,
then true noblesse would
learn him forbearance from so foul a wrong.
What subject can give sentence on his king?
And who stands here that is not Richard's subject?
Thieves are not judged but they are by to hear,
although apparent guilt be seen in them.
And shall the figure of God's majesty,
his captain, steward, deputy elect,
anointed, crowned, planted many years,
be judged by subject and inferior breath,
and he himself not present?
Oh, forfend it, God,
that in a Christian climate
souls refined should show so heinous, black, obscene a deed.
Traitor!
I speak to subjects, and a subject speaks,
stirred up by God, thus boldly for his king.
My lord of Hereford here, whom you call king,
is a foul traitor to proud Hereford's king.
And if you crown him, let me prophesy.
The blood of English shall manure the ground
and future ages groan for this foul act.
Peace shall go sleep with Turks and infidels.
And in this seat of peace,
tumultuous wars shall kin with kin and kind with kind confound.
Disorder, horror, fear, and mutiny shall here inhabit,
and this land be called
the field of Golgotha and dead men's skulls.
Oh, if you raise this house against this house,
it will the woefullest division prove
that ever fell upon this cursed earth.
Prevent it, resist it, let it not be so,
lest child, child's children, cry against you woe.
Well have you argued, sir,
and, for your pains, of capital treason we arrest you here.
My lord of Westminster,
be it your charge to keep him safely till his day of trial.
May it please you, lords, to grant the commons' suit.
Aye!
Fetch hither Richard, that in common view he may surrender,
so we shall proceed without suspicion.
I will be his conduct.
Alack, why am I sent for to a king
before I have shook off the regal thoughts
wherewith I reigned?
I hardly yet have learned
to insinuate, flatter, bow, and bend my knee.
Give sorrow leave awhile to tutor me to this submission.
Yet I well remember the favors of these men.
Were they not mine?
Did they not sometime cry, "all hail" to me?
So Judas did to Christ.
But he, in 12, found truth in all but 1.
I, in 12,000, none.
God save the king!
Will no man say amen?
Am I both priest and clerk?
Well, then, amen.
God save the king.
Although I be not he,
and yet, amen, if heaven do think him me.
To do what service am I sent for hither?
To do that office of thine own goodwill
which tired majesty did make thee offer:
the resignation of thy state and crown to Henry Bolingbroke.
Give me the crown.
Here, cousin, seize the crown.
Here, cousin.
On this side my hand, and on that side yours.
Now is this golden crown like a deep well
that owes two buckets, filling one another,
the emptier ever dancing in the air,
the other down, unseen, and full of water.
That bucket down and full of tears am I,
drinking my griefs whilst you mount up on high.
I thought you had been willing to resign.
My crown I am, but still my griefs are mine.
You may my glories and my state depose,
but not my griefs.
Still am I king of those.
Part of your cares you give me with your crown.
Your cares set up do not pluck my cares down.
My care is loss of care, by old care done.
Your care is gain of care, by new care won.
The cares I give I have, though given away.
They tend the crown, yet still with me they stay.
Are you contented to resign the crown?
Aye.
No!
No.
Aye, for I must nothing be.
Therefore no, no, for I resign to thee.
Now, mark me, how I will undo myself.
I give this heavy weight from off my head
and this unwieldy scepter from my hand,
the pride of kingly sway from out my heart.
With mine own tears I wash away my balm.
With mine own hands I give away my crown.
With mine own tongue deny my sacred state.
With mine own breath release all duty's oaths.
All pomp and majesty I do forswear.
My manors, rents, revenues I forego.
My acts, decrees, and statutes I deny.
God pardon all oaths that are broke to me.
God keep all vows unbroke are made to thee.
Make me that nothing have with nothing grieved,
and thou with all pleased that hast all achieved.
Long mayst thou live in Richard's seat to sit,
and soon lie Richard in an earthly pit.
God save King Henry, unkinged Richard says,
and send him many years of sunshine days.
What more remains?
No more, but that you read
these accusations and these grievous crimes
committed by your person and your followers
against the state and profit of this land,
that, by confessing them,
the souls of men may deem that you are worthily deposed.
Must I do so?
And must I ravel out my weaved-up follies?
Gentle Northumberland, if thy offences were upon record,
would it not shame thee in so fair a troop
to read a lecture of them?
If thou wouldst,
there shouldst thou find one heinous article,
containing the deposing of a king
and cracking the strong warrant of an oath,
marked with a blot, damned in the book of heaven.
Nay, all of you that stand and look upon me
whilst that my wretchedness doth bait myself,
though some of you with Pilate wash your hands,
showing an outward pity.
Yet you Pilates have here delivered me to my sour cross,
and water cannot wash away your sin.
My lord, dispatch.
Read o'er these articles.
Mine eyes are full of tears.
I cannot see.
And yet salt water blinds them not so much
but they can see a sort of traitors here.
Nay, if I turn mine eyes upon myself,
I find myself a traitor with the rest,
for I have given here my soul's consent
to undeck the pompous body of a king,
made glory base and sovereignty a slave,
proud majesty a subject, state a peasant.
My lord--
No lord of thine, thou haught, insulting man,
nor no man's lord.
I have no name, no title.
No, not that name was given me at the font,
but 'tis usurped.
Alack the heavy day
that I have worn so many winters out
and know not now what name to call myself.
Oh, that I were a mockery king of snow,
standing before the sun of Bolingbroke,
to melt myself away in waterdrops.
Good king, great king, and yet not greatly good,
and if my word be sterling yet in England,
let it command a mirror hither straight,
that it may show me what a face I have
since it is bankrupt of His Majesty.
Go some of you and fetch a looking glass.
Read o'er this paper while the glass doth come.
Fiend, thou torment'st me ere I come to hell.
Urge it no more, my lord Northumberland.
The commons then will not be satisfied.
They shall be satisfied.
I'll read enough when I do see the very book indeed
where all my sins are writ, and that's myself.
Give me the glass,
and therein will I read.
No deeper wrinkles yet?
Hath sorrow struck so many blows upon this face of mine,
and made no deeper wounds?
Oh, flattering glass,
like to my followers in prosperity,
thou dost beguile me.
Was this face the face
that every day under his household roof
did keep 10,000 men?
Was this the face that, like the sun, did make beholders wink?
Is this the face which faced so many follies
that was at last outfaced by Bolingbroke?
A brittle glory shineth in this face,
as brittle as the glory is the face.
For there it lies, cracked in a hundred shivers.
Mark, silent king, the moral of this sport.
How soon my sorrow hath destroyed my face.
The shadow of your sorrow hath destroyed
the shadow of your face.
Say that again.
The shadow of my sorrow.
Ha!
Let's see.
'Tis very true.
My grief lies all within.
And these external manners of lament
are merely shadows to the unseen grief
that swells with silence in the tortured soul.
There lies the substance,
and I thank thee, king, for thy great bounty
that not only givest me cause to wail
but teachest me the way how to lament the cause.
I'll beg one boon, and then be gone and trouble you no more.
Shall I obtain it?
Name it, fair cousin.
Fair cousin?
I am greater than a king,
for when I was a king,
my flatterers were then but subjects.
Being now a subject, I have a king here to my flatterer.
Being so great, I have no need to beg.
Yet ask.
And shall I have?
You shall.
Then give me leave to go.
Whither?
Whither you will, so I were from your sights.
Go, some of you convey him to the tower.
Oh, good.
Convey?
Conveyers are you all
that rise thus nimbly by a true king's fall.
On Wednesday next, we solemnly set down our coronation.
Lords, prepare yourselves.
God save the king!
A woeful pageant have we here beheld.
The woe's to come.
The children yet unborn
shall feel this day as sharp to them as thorn.
You holy clergymen, is there no plot
to rid the realm of this pernicious blot?
This way the king will come.
This is the way to Julius Caesar's ill-erected tower,
to whose flint bosom my condemned lord
is doomed a prisoner by proud Bolingbroke.
Here let us rest, if this rebellious earth
have any resting for her true king's queen.
But soft, but see, or rather do not see,
my fair rose wither.
Yet look up, behold,
that you in pity may dissolve to dew
and wash him fresh again with true love tears.
Ah, thou, the model where old Troy did stand,
thou map of honor, thou King Richard's tomb,
and not King Richard.
Thou most beauteous inn,
why should hard-favored grief be lodged in thee,
when triumph is become an alehouse guest?
Join not with grief, fair woman.
Do not so, to make my end too sudden.
Learn, good soul,
to think our former state a happy dream,
from which awaked,
the truth of what we are shows us but this.
I am sworn brother, sweet, to grim necessity,
and he and I will keep a league till death.
Hie thee to France and cloister thee in some religious house.
Our holy lives must win a new world's crown,
which our profane hours here have stricken down.
What, is my Richard both in shape and mind
transformed and weakened?
Hath Bolingbroke deposed thine intellect?
Hath he been in thy heart?
The lion dying thrusteth forth his paw
and wounds the earth, if nothing else,
with rage to be o'erpower'd.
And wilt thou, pupil-like,
take the correction mildly, kiss the rod,
and fawn on rage with base humility,
which art a lion and the king of beasts?
King of beasts indeed.
If aught but beasts, I had still been a happy king of men.
Good sometimes queen, prepare thee hence for France.
Think I am dead and that even here thou takest,
as from my deathbed, thy last living leave.
In winter's tedious nights,
sit by the fire with good old folks
and let them tell thee tales of woeful ages long ago betid.
And ere thou bid good night, to quit their griefs,
tell thou the lamentable tale of me
and send the hearers weeping to their beds.
For why, the senseless brands will sympathize
the heavy accent of thy moving tongue
and in compassion weep the fire out.
And some will mourn in ashes, some coal black,
for the deposing of a rightful king.
My lord, the mind of Bolingbroke is changed.
You must to Pomfret, not unto the tower.
And, madam, there is order ta'en for you.
With all swift speed you must away to France.
Northumberland, thou ladder wherewithal
the mounting Bolingbroke ascends my throne,
the time shall not be many hours of age
more than it is ere foul sin gathering head
shall break into corruption.
Thou shalt think,
though he divide the realm and give thee half,
it is too little, helping him to all.
And he shall think that thou
which know'st the way to plant unrightful kings
wilt know again, being ne'er so little urged,
another way to pluck him headlong
from the usurped throne.
The love of wicked men converts to fear,
that fear to hate,
and hate turns one or both
to worthy danger and deserved death.
My guilt be on my head, and there an end.
Take leave and part, for you must part forthwith.
Doubly divorced.
Bad men, you violate a twofold marriage,
'twixt my crown and me,
and then betwixt me and my married wife.
Let me unkiss the oath 'twixt thee and me.
And yet not so, for with a kiss 'twas made.
Part us, Northumberland--
I toward the north,
where shivering cold and sickness pines the clime.
My wife to France,
from whence, set forth in pomp,
she came adorned hither like sweet May,
sent back like Hallowmas or short'st of day.
And must we be divided?
Must we part?
Aye, hand from hand, my love, and heart from heart.
Banish us both and send the king with me.
That were some love but little policy.
Then whither he goes, thither let me go.
So two, together weeping, make one woe.
Weep thou for me in France, I for thee here.
Better far off than near, be ne'er the near.
Go, count thy way with sighs.
I mine with groans.
So longest way shall have the longest moans.
Twice for one step I'll groan, the way being short,
and piece the way out with a heavy heart.
Come, come, in wooing sorrow let's be brief,
since, wedding it, there is such length in grief.
One kiss shall stop our mouths, and dumbly part.
Thus give I mine, and thus take I thy heart.
Give me mine own again.
'Twere no good part to take on me to keep and kill thy heart.
Now I have mine own again.
Be gone that I may strive to kill it with a groan.
We make woe wanton with this fond delay.
Once more, adieu.
The rest let sorrow say.
My lord,
you told me you would tell the rest,
when weeping made you break the story off,
of our two cousins coming into London.
Where did I leave?
At that sad stop, my lord,
where rude, misgoverned hands from windows' tops
threw dust and rubbish on King Richard's head.
Then, as I said, the duke, great Bolingbroke,
mounted upon a hot and fiery steed,
which his aspiring rider seemed to know,
with slow but stately pace kept on his course,
whilst all tongues cried "God save thee, Bolingbroke."
You would have thought the very windows spake,
so many greedy looks of young and old
through casements darted their desiring eyes
upon his visage,
and that all the walls with painted imagery
had said at once "Jesu preserve thee.
Welcome, Bolingbroke."
Whilst he, from the one side to the other turning,
bareheaded,
lower than his proud steed's neck,
bespake them thus:
"I thank thee, countrymen."
And thus still doing, thus he passed along.
Alack, poor Richard.
Where rode he the whilst?
As in a theatre, the eyes of men,
after a well-graced actor leaves the stage,
are idly bent on him that enters next,
thinking his prattle to be tedious.
Even so, but with much more contempt,
did men's eyes scowl on gentle Richard.
No man cried, "God save him."
No joyful tongue gave him his welcome home.
But dust was thrown upon his sacred head,
which with such gentle sorrow he shook off,
his face still combating with tears and smiles,
the badges of his grief and patience,
that had not God, for some strong purpose,
steeled the hearts of men, they must perforce have melted,
and barbarism itself have pitied him.
But heaven hath a hand in these events,
to whose high will we bound our calm contents.
To Bolingbroke we are sworn subjects now,
whose state and honor I for aye allow.
Here comes my son Aumerle.
Aumerle that was.
But that is lost for being Richard's friend.
And, madam, you must call him Rutland now.
I am in parliament pledge for his truth
and lasting fealty to the new made king.
Welcome, my son.
Who are the violets now
that strew the green lap of the new come spring?
Madam, I know not, nor I greatly care not.
God knows I had as lief be none as one.
Well, bear you well in this new spring of time,
lest you be cropped before you come to prime.
What news from Oxford?
Those jousts and triumphs hold?
For aught I know, my lord, they do.
You will be there, I know.
If God prevent not, I purpose so.
What seal is that, that hangs without thy bosom?
Yea, look'st thou pale?
Let me see the writing.
My lord, 'tis nothing.
No matter, then, who see it.
I will be satisfied.
Let me see the writing.
I do beseech Your Grace to pardon me.
It is a matter of small consequence,
which for some reasons I would not have seen.
Which for some reasons, sir, I mean to see.
I fear--I fear--
What should you fear?
'Tis nothing but some bond
that he is entered into for gay apparel against the triumph day.
Bound to himself.
What doth he with a bond that he is bound to?
Wife, thou art a fool.
Boy, boy, let me see the writing.
I do beseech you, pardon me.
I may not show it.
I will be satisfied.
Let me see it, I say.
Treason.
Foul treason.
Villain.
Traitor.
Slave.
My lord, what is the matter?
Ho.
Who is within there?
Saddle my horse.
God for his mercy, what treachery is here.
Why, what is it, my lord?
Bring me my boots, I say.
Saddle my horse.
Now, upon mine honor, by my life, my troth,
I will appeach the villain.
What is the matter?
Peace, foolish woman.
I will not peace.
What is the matter, Aumerle?
Good Mother, be content.
It is no more than my poor life must answer.
Thy life answer.
Bring me my boots.
I will unto the king.
Strike him, Aumerle.
Poor boy, thou art amazed.
Hence, villain.
Never more come in my sight.
Give me my boots, I say.
Why, York, what wilt thou do?
Wilt thou not hide the trespass of thine own?
Have we more sons or are we like to have?
Is not my teeming date drunk up with time?
And wilt thou pluck my fair son from mine age
and rob me of a happy mother's name?
Is he not like thee?
Is he not thine own?
Thou fond, mad woman,
wilt thou conceal this dark conspiracy?
A dozen of them here have ta'en the sacrament
and interchangeably set down their hands
to kill the king at Oxford.
He shall be none.
We will keep him here.
Then what is that to him?
Away, fond woman.
Were he 20 times my son, I would appeach him.
Hadst thou groaned for him as I have done,
thou wouldst be more pitiful.
But now I know thy mind.
Thou dost suspect that I have been disloyal to thy bed
and that he is a bastard, not thy son.
Sweet York, sweet husband, be not of that mind.
He is as like thee as a man may be,
not like to me, or any of my kin, and yet I love him.
Make way, unruly woman.
After, Aumerle.
Mount thee upon his horse.
Spur post and get before him to the king.
I'll not be long behind.
Though I be old, I doubt not but to ride as fast as York.
And never will I rise up from the ground
till Bolingbroke have pardoned thee.
Away.
Be gone.
What means our cousin that he stares and looks so wildly?
God save Your Grace.
I do beseech Your Majesty
to have some conference with Your Grace alone.
Withdraw yourselves and leave us here alone.
My lord!
What is the matter with our cousin now?
Forever may my knees grow to the earth,
my tongue cleave to my roof within my mouth
unless a pardon ere I rise or speak.
Intended or committed was this fault?
If on the first, how heinous e'er it be
to win thy after love I pardon thee.
Then give me leave that I may turn the key
that no man enter till my tale be done.
Have thy desire.
My liege, look to thyself.
Beware.
Thou hast a traitor in thy presence there.
Villain, I'll make thee safe.
Stay thy revengeful hand.
Thou hast not cause to fear.
Open the door, or I will break it open.
What is the matter?
Uncle, speak.
Recover breath.
Tell us how near is danger that we may arm us to encounter it.
Peruse this writing
and thou shalt know the treason that my haste forbids me show.
Remember as thou read'st thy promise passed.
I do repent me.
Read not my name there.
My heart is not confederate with my hand.
It was, villain, ere thy hand did set it down.
I tore it from the traitor's bosom, king.
Fear, and not love, begets his penitence.
Forget to pity him, lest thy pity prove
a serpent that will sting thee to the heart.
Oh, heinous, strong, and bold conspiracy.
Oh, loyal father of a treacherous son,
thou sheer, immaculate, and silver fountain
from whence this stream through muddy passages
hath held his current and defiled himself,
thy overflow of good converts to bad,
and thy abundant goodness shall excuse
this deadly blot in thy digressing son.
So shall my virtue be his vice's bawd.
And he shall spend mine honor with his shame
as thriftless sons their scraping fathers' gold.
Mine honor lives when his dishonor dies,
or my shamed life in his dishonor lies.
Thou kill'st me in his life, giving him breath.
The traitor lives.
The true man's put to death.
What ho, my liege.
For God's sake, let me in.
What shrill-voiced suppliant makes this eager cry?
A woman, and thy aunt, great king.
'Tis I.
Speak with me.
Pity me.
Open the door.
A beggar begs that never begged before.
Our scene is altered from a serious thing
and now changed to "The Beggar and the King."
My dangerous cousin, let your mother in.
I know she's come to pray for your foul sin.
If thou do pardon whosoever pray,
more sins for this forgiveness prosper may.
This festered joint cut off, the rest rest sound.
This let alone will all the rest confound.
Oh, king, believe not this hardhearted man.
Love loving not itself none other can.
Thou frantic woman, what dost thou make here?
Shall thy old dugs once more a traitor rear?
Sweet York, be patient.
Hear me, gentle liege.
Rise up, good Aunt.
Not yet, I thee beseech.
Forever will I walk upon my knees
and never see day that the happy sees
till thou give joy,
until thou bid me joy,
by pardoning Rutland, my transgressing boy.
Unto my mother's prayers I bend my knee.
Against them both my true joints bended be.
Ill mayst thou thrive, if thou grant any grace.
Pleads he in earnest?
Look upon his face.
His eyes do drop no tears.
His prayers are in jest.
His words come from his mouth, ours from our breast.
He prays but faintly and would be denied.
We pray with heart and soul and all besides.
His weary joints would gladly rise, I know.
Our knees shall kneel till to the ground they grow.
His prayers are full of false hypocrisy,
ours of true zeal and deep integrity.
Our prayers do outpray his.
Then let them have that mercy that true prayer ought to have.
Good Aunt, stand up.
Nay, do not say, "stand up."
Say, "pardon" first, and afterwards "stand up."
And if I were thy nurse, thy tongue to teach,
"pardon" would be the first word of thy speech.
I never longed to hear the word till now.
Say "pardon," King.
Let pity teach thee how.
The word is short, but not so short as sweet.
No word like "pardon" for kings' mouths so meet.
Speak it in French, king.
Say, "Pardonne moi."
Dost thou teach pardon pardon to destroy?
Oh, my sour husband, my hardhearted lord,
that sets the word itself against the word.
Speak "pardon" as 'tis current in our land.
The chopping French we do not understand.
Thine eye begins to speak.
Set thy tongue there.
Or in thy piteous heart plant thou thine ear
that hearing how our plaints and prayers do pierce,
pity may move thee "pardon" to rehearse.
Good Aunt, stand up.
I do not sue to stand.
Pardon is all the suit I have in hand.
I pardon him,
as God shall pardon me.
Oh, happy vantage of a kneeling knee.
Yet am I sick for fear.
Speak it again.
Twice saying "pardon" doth not pardon twain,
but makes one pardon strong.
With all my heart, I pardon him.
A god on earth thou art.
But for our trusty brother-in-law and the abbot,
with all the rest of that consorted crew,
destruction straight shall dog them at the heels.
Good Uncle, help to order several powers to Oxford
or where'er these traitors are.
They shall not live within this world, I swear,
but I will have them, if I once know where.
Uncle, farewell.
And, cousin, adieu.
Your mother well hath prayed and prove you true.
Come, my old son.
I pray God make thee new.
Did thou not mark the king, what words he spake?
"Have I no friend will rid me of this living fear?"
Was it not so?
These were his very words.
"Have I no friend?" quoth he.
He spake it twice and urged it twice together, did he not?
He did.
And speaking it, he wistly looked on me
as who should say, "I would thou wert the man
that would divorce this terror from my heart,"
meaning the king at Pomfret.
Come, let's go.
I am the king's friend and will rid his foe.
I have been studying how I may compare
this prison where I live unto the world.
And for because the world is populous
and here is not a creature but myself, I cannot do it.
Yet I'll hammer it out.
My brain I'll prove the female to my soul,
my soul the father,
and these two beget a generation of still breeding thoughts,
and these same thoughts people this little world
in humors like the people of this world,
for no thought is contented.
The better sort, as thoughts of things divine are intermixed
with scruples and do set the word itself against the word.
As thus, "Come, little ones."
And then again, "It is as hard to come as for a camel
to thread the postern of a small needle's eye."
Thoughts tending to ambition, they do plot unlikely wonders--
how these vain weak nails
may tear a passage through the flinty ribs
of this hard world, my ragged prison walls.
And, for they cannot, die in their own pride.
Thoughts tending to content flatter themselves
that they are not the first of fortune's slaves,
nor shall not be the last.
Like silly beggars who, sitting in the stocks,
refuge their shame,
that many have and others must sit there.
And in this thought they find a kind of ease,
bearing their own misfortunes on the back
of such as have before endured the like.
Thus play I in one person many people,
and none contented.
Sometimes am I king.
Then treasons make me wish myself a beggar,
and so I am.
Then crushing penury persuades me I was better when a king.
Then am I kinged again,
and by and by think that I am unkinged by Bolingbroke
and straight am nothing.
But whate'er I be,
nor I nor any man that but man is,
with nothing shall be pleased
till he be eased with being nothing.
Music do I hear?
Oh, keep time.
How sour sweet music is
when time is broke and no proportion kept.
So is it in the music of men's lives.
And here have I the daintiness of ear
to cheque time broke in a disordered string,
but for the concord of my state and time
had not an ear to hear my true time broke.
I wasted time, and now doth time waste me.
For now hath time made me his numbering clock.
My thoughts are minutes.
And with sighs they jar their watches on unto mine eyes,
the outward watch,
whereto my finger, like a dial's point,
is pointing still, in cleansing them from tears.
Now, sir, the sound that tells what hour it is
are clamorous groans that beat upon my heart,
which is the bell.
So sighs and tears and groans show minutes, times, and hours.
But my time runs posting on in Bolingbroke's proud joy,
while I stand fooling here, his Jack o' the clock.
This music mads me!
Let it sound no more!
For though it have holp madmen to their wits,
in me it seems it will make wise men mad.
Yet blessing on his heart that gives it me,
for 'tis a sign of love.
And love to Richard is a strange brooch in this all hating world.
Hail, royal prince.
Thanks, noble peer.
The cheapest of us is ten groats too dear.
What art thou?
And how comest thou hither
where no man never comes but that sad dog
that brings me food to make misfortune live?
I was a poor groom of thy stable, king,
when thou wert king,
who, traveling towards York,
with much ado at length have gotten leave
to look upon my sometimes royal master's face.
Oh, how it yearned my heart
when I beheld in London streets that coronation day
when Bolingbroke rode on roan Barbary,
that horse that thou so often hast bestrid,
that horse that I so carefully have dressed.
Rode he on Barbary?
Tell me, gentle friend, how went he under him?
So proudly as if he disdained the ground.
So proud that Bolingbroke was on his back.
That jade hath eat bread from my royal hand.
This hand hath made him proud with clapping him.
Would he not stumble?
Would he not fall down, since pride must have a fall,
and break the neck of that proud man that did usurp his back?
Forgiveness, horse.
Why do I rail on thee,
since thou, created to be awed by man, wast born to bear?
I was not made a horse,
and yet I bear the burden like an ass,
spurred, galled, and tired by jouncing Bolingbroke.
Fellow, give place.
Here is no longer stay.
If thou love me, 'tis time thou wert away.
What my tongue dares not, that my heart shall say.
My lord, will it please you to fall to?
Taste of it first, as thou art wont to do.
My lord, I dare not.
Sir Pierce of Exton, who lately came from the king,
commands the contrary.
The devil take Henry of Lancaster and thee.
Patience is stale, and I am weary of it.
Help!
How now.
What means death in this rude assault?
Villain!
Thy own hand yields thy death's instrument.
Go thou, and fill another room in hell.
That hand shall burn in never quenching fire
that staggers thus my person.
Exton, thy fierce hand
hath with the king's blood stained the king's own land.
Mount; mount, my soul.
Thy seat is up on high,
whilst my gross flesh sinks downward, here to die.
Kind Uncle York, the latest news we hear
is that the rebels have consumed with fire
our town of Cicester in Gloucestershire.
Whether they be ta'en or slain we hear not.
The grand conspirator, abbot of Westminster,
with clog of conscience and sour melancholy,
hath yielded up his body to the grave.
But here is Carlisle living
to abide thy kingly doom and sentence of his pride.
Carlisle, this is your doom.
Choose out some secret place, some reverend room,
more than thou hast, and with it joy thy life.
So as thou livest in peace, die free from strife.
For though mine enemy thou hast ever been,
high sparks of honor in thee have I seen.
Great king,
within this coffin I present thy buried fear.
Herein all breathless lies
the mightiest of thy greatest enemies,
Richard of Bordeaux,
by me hither brought.
Exton, I thank thee not,
for thou hast wrought a deed of slander with thy fatal hand
upon my head and all this famous land.
From your own mouth, my lord, did I this deed.
They love not poison that do poison need,
nor do I thee.
Though I did wish him dead,
I hate the murderer,
love him murdered.
The guilt of conscience take thou for thy labor,
but neither my good word nor princely favor.
With Cain go wander through shades of night,
and never show thy head by day nor light.
Lords, I protest my soul is full of woe
that blood should sprinkle me to make me grow.
Come, mourn with me for what I do lament,
and put on sullen, black incontinent.
I'll make a voyage to the Holy Land
to wash this blood from off my guilty hand.
March sadly after.
Grace my mournings here
in weeping after this untimely bier.